extend readme (#132)
AET-DevOps26/team-devsecops: README.md

Coverage reports: https://aet-devops26.github.io/team-devsecops/

Public API scheme (Swagger UI): https://devsecops.stud.k8s.aet.cit.tum.de/swagger-ui/index.html

Monitoring (Grafana): https://devsecops.stud.k8s.aet.cit.tum.de/grafana

## Setup Guide

All components of the project can be deployed locally through the `docker-compose.yml` at the root level.
In order to use the AI features, run the following command to copy the template for the environment variable setup.

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Now you may edit the `.env` file to set up the large language model that will be used.
Set the `PROVIDER` variable to `google_genai` if you want to use a model through Googles API, `openai` for the Logos API, or `local` if you have a self hosted local model, for example through LM Studio.

> After inserting your API keys you are ready to run the following command to bring up all components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now edit `.env`: Specify your API provider and insert your API keys. Then run
```
The instructions are in `.env` as inline comments too. I'd prefer to keep the README short so it is perceived as "simple setup"

```bash
docker compose watch # watch enables live rebuild on src changes
```

This starts
- the web client: http://localhost:8080
- the Spring API: http://localhost:8081
- the GenAI services on the internal network
- swaggerUI documentation for public API: http://localhost:8083/openapi/openapi.yaml

> - swaggerUI documentation for internal API: http://localhost:8083/openapi/openapi-internal.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Swagger UI: http://localhost:8083 (switch to the internal API spec using the dropdown in the top right corner)
```

the links were to the raw yaml file, not to Swagger. Swagger itself contains both specs

## Architecture

### System component diagram

> ![](doc/architecture.svg)

Reviewer: We should also have the other two diagrams here (from wiki)

### Repository Overview

```text
team-devsecops/
├── .github/                    # CI/CD workflows
├── ansible/                    # Playbooks for CD to Azure VM
├── api/
    ├── scripts/genall.sh       # Auto generate models for api specs
    ├── openapi-internal.yaml   # Internal API spec

>     ├── openapi.yaml            # Public API spec

Reviewer: ```suggestion
│   ├── scripts/gen-all.sh       # Auto generate models for api specs
│   ├── openapi-internal.yaml   # Internal API spec
│   ├── openapi.yaml            # Public API spec
```

├── infra/                      # Terraform and K8s configuration
├── services/
│   ├──py-help-service/         # Help-Service source code
│   ├──py-recipe-service/       # Recipe-Service source code
│   ├──spring-api/              # Server source code
├── web-client/                 # Client source code
├── .env.example
└── docker-compose.yml
```

## API docs

The public API specification is documented at `api/openapi.yaml`.
It provides the communication contract between the client and the server.
The internal communication protocol between the server and the GenAI Services is documented at `api/openapi-internal.yaml`.

> In particular it specifies how user information is appended to client request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In particular it specifies how user information is appended to client requests.
```

Both specs can be viewed through SwaggerUI at:

https://devsecops.stud.k8s.aet.cit.tum.de/swagger-ui/index.html

> http://localhost:8083/openapi/openapi-internal.yaml (while the system is running locally)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
http://localhost:8083 (while the system is running locally)
```

Models implementing the specified schemas can be autogenerated by running `./api/scripts/gen-all.sh`.

## CI/CD and monitoring instructions

The `.github/` directory contains various workflows for running lint and test jobs, building the components and deploying them.
Deployments are triggered when merging branches into `main`.
If you want to contribute please install pre-commit using `pipx install pre-commit` and set up the pre-commit hooks using `pre-commit install`.

### Deployment to Azure VM

> An IaC configurations are provided to simplify the deployment to Azure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IaC configurations are provided to simplify the deployment to Azure.
```

The following commands allow a reproducible instantiation of a suitable VM.

```bash
cd infra            # Navigate to IaC configurations
az login            # Login to Azure

> terraform init      # Initalize working directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
terraform init      # Initialize working directory
```

> terraform plan      # Gernerates an execution plan

Reviewer: ```suggestion
terraform plan      # Generates an execution plan
```

terraform apply     # Executes plan - requires manual confirmation
```

> The github actions worklow `.github/workflows/deploy-ansible.yml` triggers the execution of the ansible playbook `ansible/site.yml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The github actions workflow `.github/workflows/deploy-ansible.yml` triggers the execution of the Ansible playbook `ansible/site.yml`.
```

> The playbook connects to the VM via ssh, clones the repository and deploys all components including a nginx instance via `infra-docker-compose.yml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The playbook connects to the VM via ssh, clones the repository and deploys all components including a nginx instance via `infra/docker-compose.yml`.
```

Coverage reports: https://aet-devops26.github.io/team-devsecops/

Public API scheme (Swagger UI): https://devsecops.stud.k8s.aet.cit.tum.de/swagger-ui/index.html

> Monitoring (Grafana): https://devsecops.stud.k8s.aet.cit.tum.de/grafana

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Monitoring (Grafana): https://grafana.devsecops.stud.k8s.aet.cit.tum.de/
```

These are: `SSH_PRIVATE_KEY` (SSH-Key to Azure-VM),  `GEMINI_MODEL`, `GEMINI_HELP_SERVICE_KEY`, `GEMINI_RECIPE_SERVICE_KEY`, `INTERNAL_AUTH_SECRET` (Authentication between Server and GenAI Services), `AZURE_DB_USER` and `AZURE_DB_PASSWORD`.

### K8s Deployment & Monitoring

The production environment is hosted on the TUM CIT Kubernetes cluster (managed via Rancher) using a GitOps-style approach.

*   **Deployment Architecture & Setup:** The cluster state is defined declaratively in `infra/k8s/`, with an Ingress controller routing external traffic to `web-client`, `spring-api` and the GenAI services. Deploying from scratch is three steps:

    ```bash
    cp infra/k8s-secrets.env.example infra/k8s-secrets.env   # then fill it in
    kubectl apply -f infra/k8s/namespace.yaml
    infra/k8s-secrets.sh && kubectl apply -R -f infra/k8s/
    ```
*   **CI/CD Pipeline:** Deployments are fully automated. When code is merged into the `main` branch, a GitHub Actions workflow validates the code, containerizes the updated components, pushes the images to the registry, and automatically rolls out the changes to the Rancher cluster.

> *   **Observability & Monitoring:** We utilize a Prometheus and Grafana stack to ensure system reliability. The Spring API and GenAI services expose metrics endpoints (e.g., via Spring Boot Actuator) that Prometheus scrapes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   **Observability & Monitoring:** We utilize Grafana, Prometheus, Alloy, Loki and Tempo for gathering and displaying metrics, logs, and traces. The Spring API and GenAI services expose metrics endpoints (e.g., via Spring Boot Actuator) that Prometheus scrapes, while traces and logs are collected by Alloy and stored in Tempo and Loki respectively.
```

> *   **Live Dashboards:** System health, resource utilization, and API latencies are visualized and can be monitored in real-time through our [Live Grafana Dashboards](https://devsecops.stud.k8s.aet.cit.tum.de/grafana).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   **Live Dashboards:** System health, resource utilization, API latencies, logs, and traces all can be monitored in real-time through our [Live Grafana Dashboards](https://grafana.devsecops.stud.k8s.aet.cit.tum.de/).
```
